>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY, JUNE 3: LONDON
POLICE RESPOND TO PEDESTRIANS
HIT BY A SPEEDING VEHICLE ON
LONDON BRIDGE AND REPORTS OF
STABBINGS IN A POPULAR MARKET.
AND, VLADIMIR PUTIN PLAYS DOWN
ALLEGATIONS OF RUSSIAN HACKING
INTO THE AMERICAN PRESIDENTIAL
ELECTION.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS AT
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING,
AND THANKS FOR JOINING US.
TONIGHT, BRITISH POLICE ARE
RESPONDING TO MULTIPLE INCIDENTS
IN CENTRAL LONDON.
SHORTLY AFTER 10:00 P.M. LONDON
TIME, A SPEEDING VAN PLOWED INTO
PEDESTRIANS ON THE WORLD FAMOUS
LONDON BRIDGE.
THE B.B.C. REPORTS AT LEAST FIVE
OR SIX PEOPLE WERE INJURED, AND
AT LEAST ONE HAS DIED.
A B.B.C. REPORTER ON THE SCENE
SAID THE VAN HAD BEEN TRAVELING
AROUND 50 MILES AN HOUR.
SHE SAID A MAN WAS LED AWAY IN
HANDCUFFS, BUT NO ARRESTS HAVE
BEEN CONFIRMED.
IN A SECOND INCIDENT, ARMED
POLICE RESPONDED TO REPORTS OF A
STABBING IN NEARBY BOROUGH
MARKET, A POPULAR FOOD AND DRINK
SPOT.
THE THIRD INCIDENT-- NOT YET
DESCRIBED-- IS IN THE VAUXHALL
NEIGHBORHOOD, A COMMERCIAL AND
RESIDENTIAL AREA TWO MILES FROM
LONDON BRIDGE.
DOWNING STREET SAYS PRIME
MINISTER THERESA MAY IS
RECEIVING REGULAR UPDATES, AND
THE WHITE HOUSE SAYS PRESIDENT
TRUMP HAS BEEN BRIEFED.
TONIGHT'S INCIDENTS COME FIVE
DAYS BEFORE A NATIONAL ELECTION
CALLED BY PRIME MINISTER MAY AND
LESS THAN TWO WEEKS AFTER THE
TERRORIST ATTACK IN MANCHESTER,
ENGLAND, WHERE A SUICIDE BOMBER
KILLED 22 PEOPLE LEAVING A POP
MUSIC CONCERT.
FOR THE SECOND DAY IN A ROW,
RUSSIAN PRESIDENT VLADIMIR PUTIN
IS REJECTING THE ASSERTION BY
AMERICAN INTELLIGENCE AGENCIES
THAT RUSSIANS MEDDLED IN LAST
YEAR'S U.S. PRESIDENTIAL
ELECTION TO THE POTENTIAL
BENEFIT OF DONALD TRUMP.
IN AN EXCERPT FROM AN INTERVIEW
WITH NBC NEWS TO BE BROADCAST
TOMORROW, PUTIN SUGGESTS
HACKERS, EVEN IN THE U.S., COULD
HAVE PLANTED EVIDENCE TO FRAME
RUSSIA.
>> (translated): HACKERS CAN
BE ANYWHERE.
THEY CAN BE IN RUSSIA, IN ASIA.
THERE CAN EVEN BE HACKERS BY THE
WAY, IN THE UNITED STATES, WHO
VERY SKILLFULLY AND
PROFESSIONALLY SHIFTED THE
BLAME, AS WE SAY, ONTO RUSSIA.
>> Sreenivasan: ANTI-TRUMP
DEMONSTRATIONS IN WASHINGTON AND
MANY OTHER CITIES TODAY STAGED
WHAT THEY CALLED "MARCHES FOR
TRUTH" DEMANDING ANSWERS ON
ELECTION MEDDLING AND THE
RELEASE OF THE PRESIDENT'S TAX
RETURNS.
AT THE SAME TIME, SUPPORTERS OF
MR. TRUMP AND HIS DECISION
THIS WEEK TO WITHDRAW FROM THE
PARIS CLIMATE CHANGE ACCORD
RALLIED OUTSIDE THE WHITE HOUSE.
AS A SPECIAL COUNSEL RAMPS UP
HIS PROBE INTO RUSSIAN HACKING
AND POSSIBLE COLLUSION WITH THE
TRUMP CAMPAIGN, ONE PENDING
QUESTION IS WHY THE TRUMP
ADMINISTRATION HAS CONSIDERED
LIFTING ECONOMIC SANCTIONS ON
AND RETURNING SEIZED DIPLOMATIC
COMPOUNDS IN THE U.S. TO
RUSSIA?
YAHOO NEWS CHIEF INVESTIGATIVE
CORRESPONDENT MICHAEL ISIKOFF
REPORTED ON THAT ANGLE THIS
WEEK, AND JOINS ME NOW FROM
WASHINGTON.
SO, LET'S TALK A LITTLE BIT
ABOUT THESE ECONOMIC SANCTIONS.
YOUR REPORTING SEEMS TO SHOW
THAT THERE WAS PRESSURE FROM THE
TRUMP ADMINISTRATION VERY EARLY
ON TO GET THESE LIFTED.
>> EXACTLY.
IN ITS FIRST FEW DAYS, THERE
WERE TASKINGS TO THE STATE
DEPARTMENT TO DEVELOP PROPOSALS
TO EASE TENSIONS WITH RUSSIA.
AND WHAT THE TRUMP PEOPLE WERE
LOOKING FOR WERE PROPOSALS TO
EASE OR LIFT SANCTIONS THAT HAD
BEEN IMPOSED BY THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION ON RUSSIA AFTER
ITS INTERFERENCE... INTERVENTION
IN UKRAINE, AND ITS MEDDLING IN
THE PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT WOULD THE
U.S. GET BACK?
IT WAS COOPERATION... SORT OF
FUTURE COOPERATION IN THE FIGHT
AGAINST ISIS?
>> RIGHT.
THAT WAS WHAT DISTURBED SO MANY
PEOPLE IN THE STATE DEPARTMENT.
THESE SANCTIONS WERE IMPOSED FOR
SPECIFIC REASONS, AS A
PUNISHMENT.
AND WITHOUT AN ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF
THAT, WITHOUT AN AGREEMENT BY
THE RUSSIANS TO LIVE UP TO THE
MINSK ACCORDS IN UKRAINE, TO END
THE VIOLENCE THERE, AND
ACKNOWLEDGE ITS ROLE IN THE
ELECTION, THESE WERE SEEN AS
UNILATERAL CONCESSIONS TO THE
RUSSIANS.
>> Sreenivasan: SUBSEQUENTLY,
THERE WAS ACTUALLY PUSH-BACK
FROM REPUBLICAN MEMBERS LIKE
LINDSEY GRAHAM, WHO SAID THAT WE
SHOULDN'T GO OUT OF OUR WAY TO
GIVE THEM SOMETHING FOR NOTHING.
>> THERE WAS A FIERCE
BUREAUCRATIC IN-FIGHTING THAT
TOOK PLACE AS A RESULT OF THIS.
FOLKS WHO GOT THESE TASKING
ORDERS, PEOPLE WHO WERE AWARE IN
THE GOVERNMENT, WHO WERE AWARE
OF WHAT THE TRUMP WHITE HOUSE
WAS LOOKING TO DO OR EXPLORING
TO DO WENT TO ALLIES-- DAN
FREED, A VETERAN STATE
DEPARTMENT DIPLOMAT WHO WAS THE
COORDINATOR FOR U.S. SANCTIONS
POLICY, WAS STILL THERE, STILL
AT THE STATE DEPARTMENT; TOM
MOLONOWSKY, WHO JUST STEPPED
DOWN AS ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF
STATE-- AND ALERTED THEM TO WHAT
IT LOOKED LIKE THE TRUMP WHITE
HOUSE WAS ABOUT TO DO.
AND THEN FREED AND MOLONOSKY
WENT TO ALLIES ON CAPITOL HILL--
SENATOR McCAIN'S OFFICE, BEN
CARDIN, THE RANKING DEMOCRAT ON
THE SENATE FOREIGN RELATIONS
COMMITTEE-- AND PRODDED THEM TO
PUSH LEGISLATION THAT WOULD
EFFECTIVELY BLOCK THE TRUMP
WHITE HOUSE FROM DOING THIS, TO
CODIFY THE SANCTIONS SO THEY
COULD NOT BE UNILATERALLY LIFTED
BY THE WHITE HOUSE.
>> Sreenivasan: THIS IS A PART
OF A LARGER PATTERN, AN INTEREST
OR AN INSTINCT THE
ADMINISTRATION HAS TOWARD
RUSSIA?
>> I THINK IT'S A BIG MISSING
PIECE OF THE PUZZLE.
WE'VE TALKED A LOT FOR MONTHS
NOW ABOUT WHETHER THERE WAS
COLLUSION BETWEEN MEMBERS OF THE
TRUMP CAMPAIGN AND THE
RUSSIANS IN ITS MEDDLING IN THE
ELECTION.
WE'VE SPENT A LOT OF TIME
TALKING ABOUT THOSE MEETINGS
DURING THE TRANSITION-- JARED
KUSHNER, MICHAEL FLYNN MEETING
WITH THE RUSSIAN AMBASSADOR AND
A RUSSIAN BANKER.
THE QUESTION IS, WHAT DID THE
RUSSIANS WANT OR HOPE TO GET
FROM THE TRUMP ADMINISTRATION?
AND THERE'S NO QUESTION, THE
NUMBER ONE ITEM ON THEIR AGENDA
WAS THE LIFTING OF SANCTIONS.
THAT'S WHAT THEY WERE HOPING TO
GET FROM THE TRUMP WHITE HOUSE.
THAT'S WHAT THEY WANTED FROM THE
ADMINISTRATION.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
MICHAEL ISIKOFF OF YAHOO NEWS,
THANKS SO MUCH FOR JOINING US.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: THE AMBASSADOR
TO THE UNITED NATIONS, NIKKI
HALEY, SAID TODAY PRESIDENT
TRUMP DOES BELIEVE CLIMATE
CHANGE IS HAPPENING AND PARTLY
CAUSED BY HUMANS.
>> PRESIDENT TRUMP BELIEVES THE
CLIMATE IS CHANGING, AND HE
BELIEVES POLLUTANTS ARE PART OF
THAT EQUATION.
>> Sreenivasan: THE FULL
INTERVIEW AIRS ON CNN TOMORROW.
IT'S THE FIRST TIME SINCE THE
PRESIDENT QUIT THE PARIS CLIMATE
ACCORD THAT AN ADMINISTRATION
OFFICIAL HAS ANSWERED WHETHER HE
STILL BELIEVES CLIMATE CHANGE IS
A HOAX.
>> Sreenivasan: AS THE ONCE WAR-
TORN NATION OF CAMBODIA HAS
SHIFTED FROM COMMUNISM TO
CAPITALISM, IT'S EXPERIENCED
STRONG ECONOMIC GROWTH AND A
BOOMING REAL ESTATE MARKET.
BUT DEVELOPMENT HAS FOSTERED A
QUEST FOR LAND THAT'S LEFT
750,000 CAMBODIANS AS VICTIMS OF
"LAND GRABS," OR EVICTIONS, FROM
PLACES THEY FARMED OR CALLED
HOME.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND SPECIAL
CORRESPONDENT KIRA KAY REPORTS
ON HOW THIS HAPPENS AND HOW
CAMBODIAN CITIZENS ARE FIGHTING
BACK.
>> Reporter: THE REIGN OF TERROR
BY THE COMMUNIST KHMER ROUGE IN
THE 1970s KILLED TWO MILLION
CAMBODIANS.
IT ALSO TURNED HUNDREDS OF
THOUSANDS INTO REFUGEES AND
ABOLISHED THE CONCEPT OF PRIVATE
OWNERSHIP OF BUSINESSES AND,
MOST CRUCIALLY, LAND.
SIA PHEARUM IS A CAMBODIAN
PROPERTY RIGHTS ACTIVIST.
>> (translated): THE KHMER
ROUGE DESTROYED ALMOST ALL
DOCUMENTS, ESPECIALLY PROPERTY
RECORDS.
WHEN WE TRANSITIONED FROM
COMMUNISM TO DEMOCRACY, REFUGEES
WHO CAME BACK FROM THE CAMPS
JUST MOVED IN AND OCCUPIED ANY
LOCATION THEY COULD FIND.
>> Reporter: IN ESSENCE,
CAMBODIA BECAME A NATION OF
SQUATTERS.
TO ATTEMPT TO ADDRESS THIS
PROBLEM, IN 2001, THE GOVERNMENT
WROTE A LAND LAW THAT WOULD GIVE
OWNERSHIP TO ANYONE WHO CAN
PROVE THEY HAVE OCCUPIED THEIR
LAND FOR FIVE YEARS.
BUT IT HASN'T BEEN ENOUGH TO
PROTECT PEOPLE AS THE COUNTRY
NOW TRANSITIONS INTO A MAGNET
FOR INVESTORS.
THOUGH STILL VERY POOR,
CAMBODIA HAS SEEN ITS ECONOMY
GROW ON AVERAGE MORE THAN 7% A
YEAR, CURRENTLY THE SIXTH
FASTEST RATE IN THE WORLD.
IN THE CAPITAL CITY, PHNOM PENH,
NEW HIGH-RISE CONSTRUCTION DOTS
THE SKYLINE, OFFERING PLACES TO
LIVE AND SHOP FOR THOSE WHO CAN
AFFORD IT.
MANUFACTURING, PARTICULARLY OF
TEXTILES, IS BOOMING, SUPPORTED
BY A CHEAP LABOR FORCE.
AND IN THE COUNTRYSIDE, SUGAR,
RUBBER, AND PALM OIL ARE LEADING
AGRICULTURAL EXPORTS.
>> (translated): CAMBODIA IS
NOW A COUNTRY OF COMPLETE PEACE,
POLITICAL STABILITY, AND STEADY
GROWTH.
>> Reporter: SENG LOTH, OF
CAMBODIA'S MINISTRY OF LAND
MANAGEMENT, URBAN PLANNING AND
CONSTRUCTION, SAYS THE COUNTRY'S
GROWTH IS GOOD FOR ALL
CAMBODIANS.
>> (translated): LIVING
CONDITIONS IMPROVE DAILY, AND IT
IS ESTIMATED THAT CAMBODIA WILL
MOVE FROM A LOW-INCOME COUNTRY
TO A MIDDLE OR EVEN HIGH-INCOME
COUNTRY BY 2030.
>> Reporter: BUT PEOPLE ARE
OFTEN IN CONFLICT WITH
DEVELOPMENT AS THE GOVERNMENT
GRANTS LARGE SWATHS OF TERRITORY
TO COMPANIES FOR COMMERCIAL
PROJECTS.
LAND RIGHTS ACTIVISTS ESTIMATE
5% OF THE COUNTRY'S 16 MILLION
PEOPLE, AND 10% OF PHNOM PENH
ARE VICTIMS OF SUCH LAND GRABS.
FOR EXAMPLE, THE PEOPLE LIVING
ON THIS PROPERTY WHO ARE
FIGHTING FOR APARTMENTS THEY SAY
THE COMMERCIAL DEVELOPER
PROMISED THEM WHEN THE
GOVERNMENT HANDED OVER SIX ACRES
OF PRIME DOWNTOWN LAND.
INSTEAD OF COMPLETING ALL THE
PROMISED NEW HOUSING, THE
DEVELOPER SENT IN BULLDOZERS,
BACKED BY POLICE, TO FORCE OUT
THE REMAINING 384 FAMILIES.
>> (translated): THEY
COMPLETELY DEMOLISHED MY HOME,
AND I WAS NOT ABLE TO TAKE ANY
BELONGINGS ALONG.
I COULD ONLY HOLD MY CHILD AS I
ESCAPED.
I HAD FIVE SEWING MACHINES, AND
THEY WERE ALSO DESTROYED.
>> Reporter: A HANDFUL HAVE
STAYED AS SQUATTERS IN A
CONDEMNED BUILDING, INSISTING
THEY SHOULD BE PROTECTED BY THE
LAND LAW SINCE THEY LIVED HERE
MORE THAN FIVE YEARS.
BUT THE DEVELOPER HAS QUESTIONED
THEIR LEGITIMACY, TELLING A
LOCAL NEWSPAPER:
THE DEVELOPER FINALLY AGREED TO
FIND APARTMENTS FOR ABOUT 10% OF
THE EVICTED FAMILIES AND
ARRANGED SOME SMALL SETTLEMENTS
FOR OTHERS.
ACTIVIST SIA PHEARUM IS WORKING
TO HELP THESE FAMILIES, BUT THE
FINAL OFFER FOR THEM TO GO IS
$3,000.
THAT'S THREE YEARS' PAY FOR THE
AVERAGE CAMBODIAN BUT A FRACTION
OF WHAT IS NEEDED TO SECURE A
NEW APARTMENT IN THE CITY.
SO, THESE FAMILIES REMAIN STUCK.
MANY OTHERS FORCED OFF THAT SITE
ARE HERE, A 90-MINUTE DRIVE FROM
THE CITY.
THEY SAY THE DEVELOPER TRUCKED
THEM HERE AGAINST THEIR WILL THE
DAY THE BULLDOZERS CAME.
>> (translated): I WAS SO
SHOCKED WHEN I LOOKED AROUND,
AND I CRIED LOUDLY, "HOW COULD I
END UP IN THIS HORRIBLE PLACE?"
>> Reporter: KHIEV LAY AND HER
NEIGHBORS HAVE STRUGGLED TO
CREATE A LIVABLE VILLAGE IN WHAT
WAS AN EMPTY FIELD JUST FIVE
YEARS AGO.
>> (translated): OUR COMMUNITY
MEMBERS HERE FACE FOOD SHORTAGES
AND POOR SHELTER.
THERE ARE NO JOBS NEARBY.
THIS SITE HAS NO SCHOOL, LIMITED
WATER AND ELECTRICITY SUPPLIES,
AND MANY BECOME SICK AND HAVE
NOWHERE TO GET MEDICAL
TREATMENT.
>> Reporter: THEY'VE BEEN ISSUED
NO PROPER TITLES FOR THEIR
MAKESHIFT RESIDENCES AND FEAR
BEING UPROOTED AGAIN.
>> (translated): IT'S LIKE
WE'RE JUST GUARDING THIS LAND
FOR THE COMPANY.
WHENEVER THEY WANT IT FOR FUTURE
DEVELOPMENT, AS LAND PRICES OUT
HERE INCREASE, WE WILL BE
VICTIMIZED BY A SECOND EVICTION.
>> Reporter: MU SOCHUA, A MEMBER
OF PARLIAMENT AND VICE PRESIDENT
OF CAMBODIA'S OPPOSITION PARTY,
CONSIDERS THE GOVERNMENT'S LAND
CONCESSION POLICY A TERRIBLE
GIVEAWAY.
>> IN THE NAME OF ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT, THE GOVERNMENT WILL
DO EVERYTHING, ANYTHING, AT ANY
COST.
A COMPANY COMES IN, FOREIGN
COMPANIES OR LOCAL COMPANIES
COME IN AND SAY, "I LIKE THIS
LAND.
I WANT THIS LAND."
THE PEOPLE ARE NOT EVEN
CONSULTED.
AND IF THEY PROTEST, THEY'RE IN
JAIL.
>> Reporter: SHE ACCUSES THE
RULING PARTY OF LONG-TIME PRIME
MINISTER HUN SEN OF GIVING LAND
CONCESSIONS TO OTHER GOVERNMENT
OFFICIALS AND WEALTHY POLITICAL
DONORS.
>> CORRUPTION IS THE CULTURE IN
CAMBODIA.
SO, HOW CAN YOU COMPETE?
AND HOW CAN YOU CALL IT
DEVELOPMENT?
IT DOES NOT BENEFIT THE POOR, IT
DOES NOT BENEFIT OUR PEOPLE.
>> Reporter: IN THE RURAL SOUTH
OF CAMBODIA, PHAV NHOEUNG AND
HER NEIGHBORS ARE LOADING UP FOR
A FOUR-HOUR DRIVE TO PHNOM PENH.
THEY'VE MADE THIS TREK FROM
THEIR VILLAGE MANY TIMES BEFORE
TO PETITION THE GOVERNMENT FOR
HELP IN GETTING BACK 2,000 ACRES
OF LAND THEY SAY WAS UNLAWFULLY
TAKEN FROM THEM.
THE VILLAGERS, WHO BEGAN FARMING
HERE IN THE 1980s, ALSO HAD
THOUGHT THEY WERE PROTECTED BY
THE 2001 CAMBODIAN LAND LAW.
BUT IN 2006, THE GOVERNMENT GAVE
THE LAND TO A SUGAR COMPANY
PARTLY OWNED BY A POWERFUL
POLITICIAN.
>> (translated): WE COULDN'T
GROW ANY CROPS, SO WE'VE LOST
INCOME, MAKING US LIVE IN
POVERTY.
WE USED TO HAVE A LOT OF
BUFFALOS AND COWS, BUT MANY
PEOPLE HAD TO SELL THEM OFF.
>> Reporter: PHAV NHOEUNG'S IS
ONE OF 175 FAMILIES FROM THIS
AREA NOW DEMANDING COMPENSATION
FOR THEIR LOST INCOME AND LAND.
>> (translated): THE
GOVERNMENT DOESN'T DARE
TO PUT PRESSURE ON POWERFUL AND
RICH INDIVIDUALS.
A COUNTRY OF LAWS SHOULDN'T BE
LIKE THIS.
>> Reporter: IN PHNOM PENH,
PROTESTS AGAINST THE GOVERNMENT
AND DEVELOPERS PEOPLE BLAME FOR
THEIR DISPLACEMENT ARE NOW A
WEEKLY OCCURRENCE AND ARRESTS
ARE FREQUENT.
ONE PROTEST LEADER IS CURRENTLY
SERVING 2.5 YEARS IN PRISON.
>> PEOPLE'S EMPOWERMENT--
THOSE ARE TWO WORDS THAT ARE
TABOO BECAUSE THE GOVERNMENT
THINKS THAT THAT IS INCITING
VIOLENCE, IT'S INCITING SOCIAL
DISORDER.
BUT TO US, IT'S THE PERFECT WAY
TO BUILD DEMOCRACY FROM THE
GRASSROOTS.
>> Reporter: ON MORE QUIET DAYS,
LAND RIGHTS ACTIVISTS ARE
TRAINING CAMBODIANS TO
UNDERSTAND THEIR RIGHTS AND PUSH
FOR FAIR COMPENSATION.
AT THIS WORKSHOP ORGANIZED BY
THE URBAN LAND RIGHTS GROUP
S.T.T., COMMUNITY
REPRESENTATIVES BRIEFED EACH
OTHER ON THEIR CASES AND
STRATEGIES.
CHEA SOPHAT, A RETIRED AIR FORCE
COLONEL, HAS BECOME AN OUTSPOKEN
LEADER OF HIS RESIDENTIAL AND
FARMING COMMUNITY, NOW BEING
OVERTAKEN BY DEVELOPMENT.
IT LIES ON A PRIME RIVERFRONT
PENINSULA ACROSS FROM DOWNTOWN
PHNOM PENH.
>> A BRIGHTER FUTURE AWAITS YOU
HERE.
>> Reporter: WITH THE APPROVAL
OF THE GOVERNMENT, A DEVELOPER
PLANS TO BUILD A MEGACITY WITH
LUXURY HOMES, OFFICES, SHOPS,
AND PUBLIC PARKS.
CONSTRUCTION WORKERS ARE FILLING
THE GREEN FARMLAND WITH SAND TO
BUILD THE FOUNDATION.
>> (translated): I HAVE
NOTHING NOW TO GIVE MY CHILDREN
WHEN I GET OLD BECAUSE THEY
GRABBED MY LAND AND OFFERED ME
JUST 10%, SO IT'S REALLY UNJUST.
>> Reporter: CHEA SOPHAT SAYS
HE'S ONE OF 200 LANDOWNERS TOLD
THEY WILL BE GIVEN NEW PLOTS OF
FARMLAND ELSEWHERE, BUT ONLY
ONE-TENTH OF THE SIZE THEY
CURRENTLY OWN.
FAMILIES WHOSE HOUSES WILL BE
DESTROYED WERE OFFERED
APARTMENTS IN THE NEW PROJECT.
CHEA SOPHAT NOW LEADS PROTESTS
IN FRONT OF THE CAMBODIAN PRIME
MINISTER'S CABINET OFFICE,
DEMANDING A FAIR NEGOTIATION.
HE SAYS HE AND HIS NEIGHBORS ARE
WILLING TO PART WITH HALF THEIR
LAND.
>> (translated): IF THEY WANT
THE REMAINING 50%, A REAL ESTATE
FIRM SHOULD EVALUATE THE LAND,
AND THEN WE CAN NEGOTIATE BASED
ON FAIR MARKET PRICE.
>> Reporter: SENSING THIS
GROUNDSWELL OF ACTIVISM,
CAMBODIA'S PRIME MINISTER HAS
INCREASED THE POWER AND EFFORTS
OF THE LAND MINISTRY.
LAND MINISTRY OFFICIAL SENG LOTH
SAYS THE GOVERNMENT HAS ISSUED
4.5 MILLION LAND TITLES TO
CITIZENS TO FORMALIZE THEIR
OWNERSHIP AND HAS 2.5 MILLION
LEFT TO GO.
>> (translated): THE
GOVERNMENT HAS A VERY STRONG
WILL TO SETTLE THESE DISPUTES,
TO LIGHTEN THE SUFFERING OF THE
PEOPLE.
AND WE ARE CONFIDENT THAT
CAMBODIA WILL, IN THE VERY NEAR
FUTURE, ACHIEVE SOCIAL HARMONY
AS LAND CONFLICTS SHARPLY DROP.
>> Reporter: THE GOVERNMENT IS
ALSO NOW MEDIATING SOME
NEGOTIATIONS BETWEEN THE
COMPANIES AND THE CITIZENS THEY
EVICTED, LIKE THOSE RURAL
VILLAGERS DISPLACED BY THE SUGAR
PLANTATION.
BUT SENG LOTH URGES THEM TO BE
REALISTIC.
>> (translated): THE VILLAGERS
DEMAND WHAT THEY THINK THEY
DESERVE WHILE THE COMPANY HAS
OFFERED ONLY WHAT IT CAN AFFORD.
SO, IT IS NECESSARY FOR THE TWO
PARTIES TO MEET HALFWAY.
>> Reporter: ON THEIR MOST
RECENT TRIP TO THE CAPITAL, THE
SUGAR PLANTATION FAMILIES WERE
OFFERED A SETTLEMENT BROKERED BY
THE MINISTRY: $2,500 EACH,
LESS THAN A QUARTER OF THEIR
ESTIMATED LOST INCOME OVER A
DECADE.
THEY WERE ALSO OFFERED NEW,
SMALLER PLOTS OF LAND ABOUT SIX
MILES FROM WHERE THEY LIVE.
73 OF THE 175 FAMILIES TOOK THE
DEAL, SOME SAYING THEY SAW NO
BETTER OPTION.
BUT THE REST, LIKE PHAV NHOEUNG,
DECLINED, SAYING THE NEW LAND IS
TOO FAR FROM THEIR HOMES TO
SUCCESSFULLY FARM.
>> (translated): WE CANNOT
GIVE UP AND STOP FIGHTING
BECAUSE WE RELY ON THE LAND.
IF THERE IS NO LAND, THERE IS NO
LIFE.
>> Sreenivasan: IN A CONDEMNED
BUILDING IN CAMBODIA, LONGTIME
RESIDENTS HAVE FORMED A UNIQUE
ARTISTS' COMMUNITY.
HEAR FROM THEM AT
www.pbs.org/newshour.
>> Sreenivasan: OVER THE PAST
FEW YEARS, MANY CLASSIC COMIC
BOOK CHARACTERS HAVE BEEN
REVAMPED FOR A MORE DIVERSE
AUDIENCE, FROM A HALF-BLACK,
HALF-LATINO SPIDERMAN TO A
FEMALE THOR.
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND'S IVETTE
FELICIANO INTRODUCES US TO THE
CREATOR OF A NEW SUPERHERO.
>> Reporter: AUTHOR GABBY RIVERA
HASN'T ALWAYS BEEN A COMIC BOOK
FAN, BUT, GROWING UP IN THE
SOUTH BRONX, SHE HAD HER FAIR
SHARE OF EXPOSURE TO SUPERHEROES
AT HOME.
>> MY PARENTS WERE HUGE MARVEL
COMIC FANS AND X-MEN FANS, AND
MY BROTHER, TOO.
AND SO, THROUGH THEM, COMICS
HAVE HAD, LIKE, SOME SORT OF
PLACE IN MY LIFE.
>> Reporter: SO, WHEN MARVEL
COMICS APPROACHED HER ABOUT
WRITING ITS NEWEST SERIES,
"AMERICA," HER REACTION WAS
MORE THAN ENTHUSIASTIC.
>> THEY APPROACHED ME VIA EMAIL,
AND I TOTALLY SCREAMED AND,
LIKE, RAN AROUND, LIKE, "OH, MY
GOD, IT'S MARVEL."
AND AT FIRST, I THOUGHT IT WAS,
LIKE, A SCAM EMAIL.
LIKE, "OH, LIKE, I'M A MARVEL
PRINCE, AND I HAVE, LIKE,
$100,000 FOR YOU," OR SOMETHING
LIKE THAT.
BUT IT WASN'T.
SO, THEY TALKED TO ME ABOUT THIS
CHARACTER, AMERICA CHAVEZ.
>> Reporter: AMERICA CHAVEZ IS
A GAY LATINA SUPERHERO RAISED
BY TWO MOTHERS WHO SACRIFICE
THEMSELVES SAVING HER HOMEWORLD.
RIVERA'S STORYLINE HAS CHAVEZ
ATTENDING COLLEGE AND LEARNING
TO USE HER POWERS, WHICH INCLUDE
SUPERHUMAN STRENGTH AND THE
ABILITY TO TRAVEL THROUGH TIME
AND BETWEEN DIMENSIONS.
>> A LATINA THAT CAN JUST GO
WHERE SHE CHOOSES IS, LIKE,
PRETTY REVOLUTIONARY, I THINK.
SHE HAS, LIKE, OWNERSHIP OF HER
OWN BODY AND HER DESTINATION,
AND THAT'S LIKE A GIFT THAT NOT
MANY OF US ARE AFFORDED.
>> Reporter: AS A SELF-DESCRIBED
"QUEER WOMAN" OF PUERTO RICAN
DESCENT, RIVERA SEES A LOT OF
HERSELF IN AMERICA CHAVEZ.
WE HAVE THIS QUEER, LATINA
SUPERHERO CHARACTER, BUT THERE'S
ALSO A QUEER LATINA WRITING THIS
STORY.
IS THERE SOMETHING SIGNIFICANT
ABOUT HAVING THE PERSON
PRODUCING THIS ALSO REPRESENT
THIS EXPERIENCE?
>> YES, 100%, HANDS DOWN.
IT'S IMPORTANT THAT, LIKE, I
INHABIT THE IDENTITIES I DO--
QUEER; BROWN; LIKE, NERD
BURGER-- YOU KNOW WHAT I MEAN?
LIKE, AND I GET TO WRITE
"AMERICA," AND SO THERE'S THIS
AUTHENTICITY IN THE VOICE.
>> Reporter: RIVERA SAYS SHE'S
BEEN WRITING STORIES SINCE HER
MOTHER TAUGHT HER TO READ AND
WRITE AS A CHILD, AND AMERICA
CHAVEZ ISN'T THE FIRST QUEER
LATINA CHARACTER SHE'S WRITTEN.
SHE'S ALSO THE AUTHOR OF THE
CRITICALLY-ACCLAIMED YOUNG ADULT
NOVEL, "JULIET TAKES A BREATH,"
ABOUT A YOUNG PUERTO RICAN
LESBIAN FROM THE BRONX TRYING TO
ANSWER QUESTIONS ABOUT HER
SEXUAL IDENTITY, GENDER, AND
FAMILY BACKGROUND.
HOW DOES THAT SORT OF WRITING
INFORM YOUR WRITING FOR THIS
PROJECT?
>> I THINK THAT IRREVERENT
NATURE OF ALSO YOUNG ADULT
FICTION, AND THE, LIKE, ABSOLUTE
CAPACITY FOR ANYTHING TO HAPPEN
IN, LIKE, THE COMIC BOOK WORLD
WORK REALLY WELL TOGETHER.
AND IT'S SO MUCH FUN.
THE VOICE OF JULIET IS FRESH AND
CURIOUS.
SHE'S JUST, LIKE, THIS YOUNG,
FREE-SPIRITED AGAIN, LIKE,
LATINA FROM THE BRONX, RIGHT?
SO, WHEN I'M WRITING "AMERICA,"
THERE IS THAT ENERGY IN THERE;
THAT, LIKE, SPIRIT OF ONE-
LINERS AND BEING TOUGH AND A
LITTLE IRREVERENT AND
SPONTANEOUS.
AND SO, THEY WORK REALLY WELL
TOGETHER.
>> Reporter: FOR RIVERA, THE
IMPLICATIONS OF A GAY PERSON-OF-
COLOR AS A SUPERHERO GO BEYOND A
SINGLE CHARACTER.
SHE HOPES AMERICANS WILL EMBRACE
A BROADER RANGE OF PEOPLE IN
COMICS AND POP CULTURE.
>> WHO DOESN'T CONNECT TO THE
PRINCIPLES OF, LIKE, SUPERMAN OR
THE LOYALTY OF A GROUP LIKE THE
X-MEN?
AND I THINK NOW IS THE TIME
WHERE PEOPLE ARE EVEN MORE
VOCALLY SAYING, "HEY, BUT IT CAN
GO A STEP FURTHER, AND THERE'S
ROOM FOR MORE STORIES, AND
THERE'S ROOM FOR MORE
IDENTITIES."
IF YOU CAN HAVE FOLKS THAT ARE,
LIKE, GIANT BLUE BEASTS AND,
LIKE, YOU KNOW, MUTANTS, THEN
THERE'S ROOM FOR A STORY ABOUT A
LITTLE LATINA LESBIAN
PUNCHING THROUGH OTHER
DIMENSIONS, YOU KNOW.
>> Sreenivasan: FINALLY,
LONDON'S METROPOLITAN POLICE HAS
DECLARED TONIGHT'S INCIDENTS
ACTS OF TERRORISM.
ON LONDON BRIDGE, A SPEEDING VAN
PLOWED INTO PEDESTRIANS, KILLING
MORE THAN ONE PERSON AND
INJURING SEVERAL MORE.
AND AT THE NEARBY BOROUGH
MARKET, THERE WERE REPORTS OF
MULTIPLE STABBINGS.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
HAVE A GOOD NIGHT.